# FASTX-Toolkit

*                                                                 *
* FASTX TOOLKIT is unmaintained software.                         *
* No new features have been added since 2010.                     *
*                                                                 *
* There are many better alternatives for low-level FASTQ/FASTA    *
* manipulation. Use at your own risk.                             *
*                                                                 *

## Short Summary

The FASTX-Toolkit is a collection of command line tools for Short-Reads
FASTA/FASTQ files preprocessing.

## More Details

Next-Generation sequencing machines usually produce FASTA or FASTQ files,
containing multiple short-reads sequences (possibly with quality information).

The main processing of such FASTA/FASTQ files is mapping (aka aligning)
the sequences to reference genomes or other databases using specialized
programs.

Example of such mapping programs are:
* [Blat](http://www.kentinformatics.com/index.asp),
* [SHRiMP](http://compbio.cs.toronto.edu/shrimp),
* [LastZ](http://www.bx.psu.edu/miller_lab),
* [MAQ](http://maq.sourceforge.net/)
* And many many others.

However,
It is sometimes more productive to preprocess the FASTA/FASTQ files before
mapping the sequences to the genome - manipulating the sequences to
produce better mapping results.

The FASTX-Toolkit tools perform some of these preprocessing tasks.

## Available Tools

* FASTQ-to-FASTA - Converts a FASTQ file to a FASTA file..

* FASTQ-Statistics - scans a FASTQ file, and produces some statistics about the
	quality and the sequences in the file.

* FASTQ-Quality-BoxPlot, and
* FASTQ-Nucleotides-Distribution - Generates charts based on the statistics
	generated by FASTQ-Statistics. These charts can be used to quickly
	see the quality of the sequenced library.

* FASTQ-Quality-Converter - Converts from ASCII to numeric quality scores.

* FASTQ-Quality-Filter - removes low-quality sequences from FASTQ files.

* FASTX-Artifacts-Filter - removes some sequencing artifacts from FASTA/Q files.

* FASTX-Barcode-Splitter - A common practice is to sequence multiple biological
	samples in the same library (marking each sample using a dedicated
	barcode). The resulting FASTA/Q file contains intermixed sequences
	from those samples. This tool separates FASTA/Q files into several
	individual files, based on the barcodes.

* FASTX-Clipper - Adapters (aka Linkers) are added to the library (before
	sequencing), and should be removed from the resulting FASTA/Q file.
	This tool removes (clips) adapters.

* FASTA-Clipping-Histogram - After clipping a FASTA file, this tool generates a
	chart showing the length of the clipped sequences.

* FASTX-Reverse-Complement - Produces a reverse-complement of FASTA/Q file.
	If a FASTQ file is given, the quality scores are also reversed.

* FASTX-Trimmer - Extract sub-seqeunces from FASTA/Q file. Two examples are:
	Removing barcodes from the 5'-end of all sequences in a FASTQ file;
	Cutting 7 nucleotides from the 3'-end of all sequences in a FASTA file.

## Software Requirements

1. GCC is required to compile most tools.

2. FASTA-Clipping-Histogram tool requires Perl, the "PerlIO::gzip",
   "GD::Graph::bars" modules.

   Installing the perl modules can be accomplised by running:

```bash
$ sudo cpan 'PerlIO::gzip'
$ sudo cpan 'GD::Graph::bars'
```

3. FASTX-Barcode-Splitter requires the GNU Sed program.

4. FASTQ-Quality-Boxplot and FASTQ-Nucleotides-Distribution requires the
   'gnuplot' program.


## Installation

When downloading the git repository from github, use the following:

```bash
   $ git clone https://github.com/agordon/fastx_toolkit
   $ cd fastx_toolkit
   $ ./reconf
   $ ./configure
   $ make
```

When downloading a released version archive:

```
   $ wget https://github.com/agordon/fastx_toolkit/releases/download/0.0.14/fastx_toolkit-0.0.14.tar.bz2
   $ tar -xjvf fastx_toolkit-0.0.14.tar.bz2
   $ cd fastx_toolkit-0.0.14
   $ ./configure
   $ make
```

The available releases are here:
   https://github.com/agordon/fastx_toolkit/releases

To install the tools, run (as root):

```
  $ sudo make install
```

This will install the tools into /usr/local/bin.
To install the tools to a different location, change the 'configure' step to:

```
  $ ./configure --prefix=/DESTINATION/DIRECTORY
```

The libgtextutils package is required to build fastx-toolkit,
see [https://github.com/agordon/libgtextutils/](https://github.com/agordon/libgtextutils/) .

## Command Line Usage

Most tools support "-h" argument to show a short help screen.
Better documentation is not available at this moment.
Some more details and examples are available in the <help> section
of the XML tool files (in the 'galaxy' subdirectory).
## Special configuration for Barcode-Splitter

When running the barcode-splitter tool from the command line you specify a
prefix direcotry - the output files will be written to that directory (similar
to GNU's split program usage).

## Licenses

FASTX-Toolkit is distributed under the Affero GPL version 3 or later (AGPLv3),

While IANAL, these licenses basically mean that:
1. You're free to use FASTX-toolkit,

2. You're free to integrate FASTX-toolkit in your Galaxy mirror server
   (or any other server).

3. You're free to modify the files under 'galaxy',
   without making your modifications public.

4. If you modify the FASTX-toolkit tools, and make those modifications
   publicly available (either as downloadable tools, part of another product),
   or as a web-based server - you must make the modified source code freely
   available (free as in speech).

See the COPYING file for the full Affero GPL.

Please remember:
  THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY
APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY
OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM
IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF
ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.


---
Please send all comments, suggestions, bug reports (or better yet - bug fixes)
to assafgordon@gmail.com .

## Changes made

* Removed galaxy part of the fastx_toolkit
